Millions of our brothers
and sisters around the world
can recount
the blessings they’ve gained
by remaining loyal
to Jehovah and his organization.
And we’re privileged to have
two such examples here with us today:
Brother and Sister
William and Sandra Malenfant.
Brother Malenfant is a helper
to the Teaching Committee,
and Sister Malenfant’s current assignment
is in the Service Department.
And we’re looking forward to hearing
about their rich spiritual history.
So, Bill and Sandra,
we’re so happy
that we could have you
here in the studio with us,
and we do look forward
to learning more about you.
Maybe we would like
to go back.
How did you get
on the road that has led you
to so many years of faithful,
loyal service to Jehovah?
It was back in 1954.
My mother had contact on and off
with the Witnesses for years.
I was about 20 years old,
and she was
invited to a public talk
at the Oakland Central Congregation
in California.
She asked me,
“Would you accompany me?”
And I said: “Yeah.
Sure, I’ll be happy to go.”
Well, I recognized a young man
I knew from high school at the meeting,
and he approached me after
and told me I needed a Bible study.
I really didn’t want a Bible study,
but he insisted,
and so I said,
“Well, you can come by.”
Would you believe it?
I started a Bible study
in the “Let God Be True” book.
Four months later,
I was baptized.
It was exactly what I was looking for,
but I didn’t realize it.
Excellent!
Now, I understand that you were
also very involved with sports.
Yes, I was playing ball
for a basketball team in Alameda,
and I enjoyed
very much playing ball.
But then, a decision came up
as to what I was going to do
because the evenings
when the team played was the same time
that we had the Service Meeting
and the Theocratic Ministry School.
So I had to
make a decision.
And my decision was:
Forget the sports,
and let’s go to the meetings
and enjoy being built up spiritually.
Good choice.
Thank you.
And, Sandra, your start on the road
to a career serving Jehovah?
I suppose you could say
that it actually started before I was born.
Before I was born, my parents
started on this search for the truth.
It happened because they
had lost a little girl in death,
and they went from church to church
looking for some kind of comfort.
And, of course, the clergy
had no comfort for them.
They just said, “Well, God wanted
another angel in heaven.”
And that angered my father.
He thought: ‘No.
‘If God wants another angel,
he can make one.
He wouldn’t take my little girl!’
So it just happened
that one evening
they were listening to the radio
—long before TV, of course—
and they heard
a Jehovah’s Witness give a talk.
And the title of that talk was
“Where Are the Dead?”
Imagine!
He gave all the Scriptural proof
about the condition of the dead
and the hope
for the resurrection.
And my father immediately said,
“This is the truth!”
So they wrote to the radio station;
got a copy
of the booklet of the talk;
and then, also,
they started receiving
the subscription
to The Watchtower.
But it wasn’t until I was born
and three years old
that the Witnesses
finally made contact with us.
Interesting.
In fact, it was interesting.
It was a real cold winter day,
and even though I was only three years old,
I remember
this family coming in.
And they stayed hours.
I even hid in the closet
and went to sleep.
But, you know,
it was just—
It was that contact
with the visible organization
that my family needed.
Because they knew
much of the truth.
They’d been reading
The Watchtower for a long time.
So my elder sisters, they got baptized
right away and started pioneering.
For my brother and I
—we were a lot smaller, of course—
we just went along with our parents
and came right into the truth.
In fact, I remember,
it was just a couple of years later
that we were all going to go
to the big convention
in 1950 at Yankee Stadium.
But I knew there was going to be
a big baptism there,
but I wanted to go
as a baptized Jehovah’s Witness.
So my father—
Everybody made arrangements,
and my father baptized me
in our pond on our farm
with another young sister.
Is that right?
So that was my beginning.
You know, Ron, there’s a point
I’d like to recall also.
Sandra was at a special convention
back in 1941.
That’s true,
even before that.
That was probably my first,
you know, big event theocratically.
Our family—my brother
was four years older than I,
along with my parents—
we went to the St. Louis convention
where Brother Rutherford
gave his famous talk on children.
And they separated—
The lower level
of this place that they rented,
this stadium,
was dedicated
to just the young children,
well, from 5 to 18 years of age.
And it was just fantastic,
you know, with this man.
When you’re small, this man
would look so big and huge,
and he had
this great big voice.
And I’ll never forget when he looked out
on the audience, and he said:
“Behold, more than
15,000 new witnesses to the Kingdom!”
So it was very emotional.
Oh, you still remember it
like it happened yesterday.
Oh, yes!
Right, how exciting!
So, what motivated you
to make a choice
to get into the full-time service
and give your life to Jehovah?
Well, what motivated me
was when I attended
a convention, also in ’56.
I got baptized in ’54.
But in ’56, I went to a district convention
in Albany, California,
and there was a pioneer booth.
Because in those days they had a booth
set up at the district conventions,
and various brothers and sisters
would man the booth
and answer your questions
about pioneer service.
So I approached the booth,
and an older sister there looked at me
and said:
“You’re young and strong.
Why aren’t you a pioneer?”
I felt, ‘Well, yes.
Why not?’
So I started
pioneering in 1956.
That’s what motivated me.
And I was—
Really, I look back at that;
it was one of the best decisions
I made in my life.
Excellent!
Yeah, so you have been making
wise decisions from your youth up.
Sandra, how about you?
Motivated to get
into full-time service.
Well, for pioneer service, you know,
it was—it was like a given.
Young people were
just encouraged to pioneer.
And you knew that when
you graduated from high school,
you started out pioneering.
And most of the young people
were doing that.
You know, after a year or two, maybe they
would get married and start a family.
But those years in pioneering
—starting out their life that way—
gave them a wonderful basis
for loyal service the rest of their life.
And not only that,
I remember that in those days
the traveling overseer
would stay in the homes
of the brothers
when he served the congregation.
And we always played host
to the circuit overseer
and his wife when they came.
And for my brother and I,
they were role models.
My sisters, as I told you,
were out pioneering in another assignment.
But for us, these brothers
were so full of zeal,
and they were
like heroes to us.
In particular, I remember when I was,
I think, about 12 years old.
This couple came around on the circuit,
Percy and Ilma Iszlaub,
they were from Australia
and, of course, we loved their accent too.
And they had just graduated
from Gilead,
and they were assigned
to Japan,
but they had to wait a number
of months to get their visa.
They served
in our congregation,
and it was really
them that instilled in me
the desire to
become a missionary.
Beautiful.
So you were pioneering.
How did your paths
eventually meet?
It was
at a circuit assembly
in Oakland, California, 1956.
Very interesting things
took place.
I had the job
of dismantling the stage.
I had not yet met Sandra.
She was out visiting her sister
who lived in the same area where I was.
And I was carrying
this large piece of plywood off the stage,
and I ran right into Sandra
and knocked her flat!
Well, I took advantage
of the opportunity.
I thought, ‘Well, that’s not
the best way to introduce yourself.’
But I said, “By the way,
would you like to accompany me
to a get-together
some of the friends are having?”
And she accepted.
And . . .
Very good, Bill.
Well, yes,
and I followed through on it.
We had a lot
of association,
and after a number of months,
we got married.
And both of us
were pioneering
—very happy in our ministry
serving Jehovah.
You really swept her off her feet.
Literally.
I fell for him.
Very good.
So, shortly after
you were married,
I understand
that you received some direction.
Yes, the circuit overseer
visited our congregation.
We were only married about a month,
I think, when he came through.
I think so.
And he told us that the organization
was looking for pioneers
who’d be willing to serve
as special pioneers and go wherever,
where the need was great
in the United States particularly.
So we told him:
“Sure. We’d be delighted to do it.”
And four months
after our marriage,
we received an assignment
as special pioneers to Decorah, Iowa.
Now, that was
a very interesting place
because there were
only eight publishers in the congregation.
But we arrived
and started with the meetings
there at the Kingdom Hall.
And the Kingdom Hall was up
above Hunt’s Variety Store
in downtown Decorah,
and we lived in a room behind it.
Well, sometimes,
especially during the wintertime
because it could be very cold,
there’d be no one at the meeting.
After all, there were
only eight publishers.
But I was insisting that:
“No, I’m going to give my public talk,
whether anyone is here or not.”
So I’d tell Sandra, “You sit there,
and I’ll give my public talk.”
A one hour talk, and then I’d conduct
the Watchtower Study
and have her answer
every question.
Well, you know,
you’re on your own like that
—not a lot of brothers around—
so you look
for encouragement and company.
And we would travel down
to Strawberry Point, Iowa,
to where
Charles and Shirley Sinutko lived
in a log cabin
—one-room log cabin.
And we’d go visit with them in order
to have some mutual encouragement.
Yeah, because they
were special pioneering also.
OK.
Well, you were both special.
It’s a nice picture of you
in that log cabin too
as you were
special pioneering.
So you’re busy
in that work.
What special invitation
did you receive?
Well, we received
the invitation to attend Gilead
—the 34th class of Gilead School—
and that was a wonderful thing
after two and half years of pioneering,
special pioneering in Iowa.
Our instructors were
Albert Schroeder, Maxwell Friend,
Bob Porter, and Jack Redford.
And we had a delightful time at Gilead,
as you can imagine.
And we were assigned
to Lebanon,
but we were unable to enter Lebanon
because we couldn’t get the visa.
So, then, the organization
asked us,
“Well, will you take
an assignment to Morocco?”
We were ready to go anywhere.
We were pioneering
with the Canarsie Congregation
just waiting to go out
into the field.
So that’s how we took
a boat from New York City
—five days across the Atlantic—
to Casablanca.
Very nice.
Well, what was it like to be
in the missionary service in Morocco?
It was very interesting.
We really enjoyed it.
But, you know, we only spoke English.
So in Morocco,
we had to learn French.
And the first month
of our missionary service in Morocco,
for 30 days we studied
the language 11 hours a day.
Well, that could get pretty tiring
for 11 hours a day,
so we’d go to the French movies
and count that as language time.
And then, we were moved
to Tangier.
And there was
a Spanish congregation in Tangier,
so we had to learn
the Spanish language too.
But that was
really a rich blessing
for the two of us
to be exposed to that culture
and to have
that privilege of serving there.
But you know
what I really enjoyed?
We had a variety
of people we preached to.
We had
a very large Jewish population,
and they were
almost all Orthodox.
But, you know,
they were very forthright,
and they were open
and quite curious.
You know, like they’d come up
to us sometimes and say:
“Well, you’re Christian,
aren’t you?
Why do you accept
Jesus as the Messiah?”
So we had to get familiar
with a lot of scriptures, you know,
that dealt with the prophecies the Messiah
would fulfill, in the Hebrew Scriptures.
And really, it was a delight.
Sandra, do you remember, there were
a lot of French people in Morocco?
Because it used to be
a colony under France,
so that’s why
the French language was so important.
And then we had Spanish people
and many other nationalities there.
So you had four years
of serving in Morocco
—faithfully, loyally meeting
all those of different languages
and learning
the language yourself.
So after four years, I understand
that you came back to visit your family.
What events
were challenging thereafter?
I think Sandra can relate that.
Well, it was
usually permitted
that after you were
in your assignment four years,
then you were allowed
to come home
and at least have a vacation
and visit your family.
And so we made arrangements
to come back.
We got some tickets
on a Yugoslav freighter;
took us two weeks
to get back to New York.
But we got back.
We visited our family,
and while there,
I had a medical examination and found out
that I had a serious health problem.
Of course, we didn’t have
the funds to cover that.
So Bill wrote to the Society,
and we made arrangements.
They said,
“Well, just take care of your situation,
and let us know when you’re free.”
So he got a job
to take care
of our medical needs
as well as living conditions.
But you know,
we just felt like we were failures.
I’d always wanted
to be a missionary,
and there we were
four years into our assignment,
and we come back and poof!
We’re just there.
But, you know,
Jehovah knew we were discouraged.
He knew we felt
distraught about this.
So he knew just what we needed,
and he gave it to us.
As I got to feeling better
and we got more free
in our use of time,
we started pioneering.
And Jehovah blessed
our ministry just incredibly.
There were times,
in this supposedly “unproductive territory”
that we had up to 25 people
attending the meetings.
Many of them got baptized,
and they’re our fast friends to this day.
That’s incredible!
So Jehovah knows what you need,
and he provides it.
That is beautiful!
What temptation
did you have to resist
when you came back
and were going through these difficulties?
Well, I think it’s
a temptation that confronts
a lot of brothers and sisters
who return because of health reasons,
and some just end up settling down
because of their circumstances.
But the temptation there was:
‘Well, you’re home.
‘You’ve already done your service
in Morocco for a number of years.
‘You’ve been
in the full-time ministry.
Just settle down now.
Buy a house.’
But really,
that wasn’t our desire.
So as soon as Sandra
got on her feet
and was feeling well enough,
we got pioneering.
And then I wrote headquarters,
and I said: ‘Here we are.
‘We’re ready
to take on whatever.
What would you
like us to do?’
You know,
I’d like to say here, Ron,
that I really appreciate
Bill as my spiritual head
because even though these things
presented themselves
in the course
of our theocratic history,
he was always quick to accept
the responsibility of what we felt
was our spiritual, familial,
and moral responsibility
but as soon as these obligations
were taken care of,
he was very quick
to get us back on the road
to meet our spiritual goals
that we had.
And I really do appreciate that.
Good example.
Thank you.
So you made yourself
available to the organization.
Where did they send you next?
A wonderful assignment.
We were sent
as special pioneers to Washington D.C.,
to help start
a Spanish congregation.
And that was indeed
a very rich blessing.
We were there
a year and a half
until that little congregation
was solid and was formed.
And then we received
another blessing.
We were appointed
to the circuit work.
So I had
the Spanish circuit in Florida
from Key West to Orlando
—one circuit in the whole state.
Then we came to New York City
—lived in the Bronx.
I had a circuit, and we did
district work in the Spanish field.
Then, to Texas
—to what they call the Valley of Texas,
the Rio Grande Valley—
for a couple
of years in the circuit.
Then the district in Spanish
from Houston, Texas,
to Yuba City, California.
And we loved
every minute of it.
Well, that’s definitely
the traveling work.
I know you were
in that work for nearly ten years,
so I’m sure
you really benefited
a lot of brothers
and sisters along the way.
Then 1977 rolls around
and you receive another invitation.
Yes, indeed!
We were doing
preconvention work
in the L.A. area
at the Leimert Assembly Hall,
and we received a letter
inviting us to come to Bethel.
That was a very, very special privilege:
to be invited to Bethel.
I went
into the Service Department,
because at that time they
invited a number of traveling overseers
to come in and work
in the Service Department,
and Sandra went
into housekeeping.
And we were both
delighted to come to Bethel.
Well, sort of.
I really loved the ministry;
I loved, especially,
the district work
—being with
the circuit overseer and his wife
every week
and out in service.
So I wasn’t too anxious
for this Bethel thing.
But, you know.
Jehovah, again, knows what you need.
We came here, and we
started adjusting to Bethel life.
And it really proved out
to be a real blessing
because we got
the close association
with so many
other loyal Witnesses of Jehovah.
Yes.
And then for the rest of us
that have been able
to work with you over the decades,
we appreciate your loyal example
and working with you.
But, I understand that shortly
after you arrived to Bethel,
you also received
some challenging family difficulties
that you needed to deal with.
Yes, Sandra had
an older sister who needed help.
Yeah.
We were still adjusting, like I said.
And we heard
that one of my older sisters,
who had spent most
of her life in the pioneer service,
she had now entered the terminal stages
in her long fight with cancer,
and she needed some homecare.
And the brothers in the organization
were very kind to me,
and they allowed
me some free time to go
and care
for that responsibility.
Then, it was
just a few years later
that my mother
was facing a similar situation.
And this time,
again, the brothers allowed
both Bill and me
to be free to go back there.
My mother was now aged 89.
She had health situations
and she lived alone, so she needed care.
And again they allowed us this time;
we went back.
And just as
in the case with my sister,
I was able to keep my mother home
just until she died.
And, you know, we appreciate
so much being granted that free time.
Even though when we left,
we didn’t know if it might mean
the end of our Bethel career.
But again we felt the need
to fulfill that responsibility.
And, you know, Ron, it was-it was
a bittersweet experience.
This is Satan’s wicked world;
death is our enemy.
And it hurts
to see a loved one suffer.
But, you know,
there’s the sweet side of it too,
because we had shared
some wonderful moments
together with my family
and experiences, shared experiences.
And we felt good
that we had been able
to help these people
that had been mentors for us.
Yes.  So loyalty to your family
and loyalty to Jehovah.
Exactly.
So you returned back
to Bethel.
You were busy
in your assignments.
And, as you mentioned, you worked
with many loyal ones at Bethel.
Could you share
one such experience of a loyal sister?
Oh yes.
I was assigned
to the Alterations Department,
the Sewing Department.
And recently before that,
Sister Gertrude
and her husband, Martin Poetzinger,
had been called into Bethel, and he was
a member of the Governing Body.
And she had been trained under a tailor,
so she was excellent in alterations.
But most valuable
were our spiritual conversations.
I learned
so much from that sister.
Once, we were talking
—a group of us—
about what our relationship
to Jehovah really means.
And Gertrude
gave us her idea,
her understanding,
of her relationship with Jehovah.
She said, “You know, sometimes in life
a situation presents itself,
“and it’s so personal
and so touching
that you don’t tell anybody about it
—except Jehovah, of course.”
And she said: “So you pray to Jehovah,
and you pray to Jehovah.
And then pass a little time,
and you feel he’s answered your prayer.”
She said: “You know,
that is like a little thread
“that unites you with Jehovah.
“Now, this is
the only person in the universe
“that shares
this experience with you.
“So it’s very personal.
“OK. Time goes by;
“another situation presents itself,
and you pray again.
“Well, here is another thread.
“And over a period of time,
you’ve got a bunch of threads
connecting you with Jehovah.”
And she said,
“And those threads are all knitted together,
and they form a cord
that unites you with Jehovah.”
And then she’d say,
“And don’t you ever do anything
to endanger that relationship.”
But, to me, it just—
It really hit my heart.
I thought, ‘This is so true.’
Our relationship with Jehovah
and our loyalty to him
has to be
the first important thing in our life.
Well, thank you for sharing that.
That has affected all of our hearts.
Appreciate that.
So, Bill, you have received
many privileges of service
before Bethel and your 40 years
since you’ve been at Bethel.
One of the privileges that you have had
is traveling to different branches
as a headquarters representative,
or a zone overseer.
What are some memories you have
of all those various visits?
It’s a very rich privilege
to do it, Ron,
to serve at that time
as a zone overseer.
The brothers receive you so well.
Basically, the zone overseer,
or now the branch representative,
he goes to be
of encouragement to brothers.
And he visits the branch; meets
with all the Bethelites whenever possible;
tries to talk to all of them,
giving encouragement;
meets with all of the missionaries
in the country.
And you’re received
so warmly.
I remember
when Sandra and I visited Tahiti.
We flew into Tahiti
—Papeete, Tahiti—
and it was three in the morning
when we arrived.
The brothers were
absolutely wonderful.
There were about 35 brothers
waiting for us there,
piling flower leis upon us,
giving us a kiss on each cheek.
But the warmth of the brothers
and the joy of being
with the Bethel family
was something.
Well, the one sister
didn’t find any room
left on your cheeks,
remember, she kissed you . . .
No. So I got a kiss
on the top of the head.
But the joy of the brothers
was just wonderful,
and we’ve had the great privilege
of visiting a number of branches.
And I understand
that you traveled to Bolivia,
and you had
a nice experience in Bolivia.
I just loved this work because I got
to play missionary when I was out there.
And, of course, my heart
was always in the missionary field.
But I remember when we went to Bolivia;
since it was a smaller branch,
I was allowed to go out
and work in service with the missionaries.
And they came, and they picked me up
at eight o’clock in the morning.
And they said, “We are going to take you
out to a Mennonite colony.”
And so I left at eight, and I didn’t get back
until eleven o’clock at night.
And I was a little bit disturbed
about that hour.
That late for her getting back.
Well, you see,
it’s a Mennonite community.
They don’t have electricity,
and we didn’t have cell phones at that time,
so he had no idea
what was happening to me.
But we studied
all day with this family,
and eventually, by the way,
they all came in to the truth.
And their experience
came out in 2005,
September 1 issue
of The Watchtower,
about this family of Mennonites
that came into the truth.
And now the work is spreading
like wildfire among the Mennonites.
But, anyway, toward the end of the day,
it was getting near dusk
and the missionary
(just to tease me) said to the family,
“Well, it’s time
to milk the cows now.
So bring up the meanest one you’ve got,
and ask Sandra to milk her.”
So, of course, he didn’t know
I was raised on a farm.
Hmm. OK.
So it had rained all day,
and it was muddy and nasty out there.
But I had my high heels on, silk blouse,
earrings, but we went out to the barn.
And they gave me a bucket,
and I was able to milk the cow.
What a nice experience.
And she wasn’t mean at all.
Well, I’m sure you
have many more experiences
to let us know about,
but we appreciate you sharing those.
The Governing Body
has made significant adjustments
in the work that is taking place
at Bethel and the field,
and it has affected
many long-time faithful brothers
—loyal brothers
in the traveling work,
overseers in the congregation,
overseers at Bethel.
Bill, what do you think
about some of these changes
that the Governing Body
has made recently?
I think they’re
very wise decisions.
They know what is needed;
they appreciate the older men
who have served for years.
We know that the older brothers
in circuit work, district work,
wherever, they’re “worthy of double honor”
because of the way
they’ve given
of themselves to the work.
But we have to recognize, too,
there comes a time
when we want the younger men
to come along,
to accept responsibility.
And, really,
when we were young,
we received responsibilities
with very little background and training.
Now we’ve got all these schools
for Kingdom Evangelizers
and the Kingdom Ministry School.
So many opportunities
for younger ones to be trained.
And so I think
it’s a wonderful arrangement.
Many thousands of young men
are doing so well,
ready to accept responsibility.
It’s a blessing
for the entire organization.
Well, thank you for sharing that.
That’ll benefit many brothers.
So we look
at this couple before us,
and we see some who have made
wise choices along the way.
So we look back at over 60 years
of faithful, loyal service.
As you look back at decisions
you made in life, any regrets?
Oh, absolutely none!
We consider that whatever
we have given up or done
it’s been our gift to Jehovah.
You know, when I was a little girl,
I remember I used to go out on our farm
and, especially when there
was a full moon, I used to pray to Jehovah.
And I’d say,
“Just let me use up my life in your service.”
You know, he’s answered
that prayer because my life,
the majority of it, is used up
and he’s let me do it in his service.
Sort of makes me think
of one of my favorite scriptures,
Jeremiah 29:11.
It’s where Jehovah,
referring to his faithful, loyal ones, says:
‘I well know the thoughts
I am thinking toward you,
not of calamity but of peace
and a future and a hope.’
Now the calamities
that we face in life,
that doesn’t come from Jehovah;
that comes from Satan’s wicked old world.
But Jehovah promises us peace,
a future, and a hope.
Now, how could you
not be loyal to such a God?
Beautiful.
Bill, how do you view sacrifices
that you have made along the way?
Well, as you know, a sacrifice
can be something
you give up to serve God, perhaps.
Or a sacrifice can be
what you give to Jehovah,
like David said in Psalm 54.
“I will sacrifice to you willingly.”
And that’s how I view sacrifice.
We’re happy to give of ourselves
to Jehovah God—to serve him.
And I want to add, too,
Sandra has been
a wonderful partner with me
—willing to go anywhere,
put up with all kinds
of circumstances and difficulties,
never complaining
about the travel
or whatever circumstances
we found ourselves in,
living very close to the earth
for a number of years as special pioneers.
But Jehovah has been with us.
A scripture that I—
There are a number
of good Scriptures,
obviously, that we all love.
But one in particular
that stays in my mind
is Romans 14:7,8:
‘We live, we live to Jehovah.
‘We die, we die to Jehovah.
So whether we live or we die,
we belong to Jehovah.’
And we’ve made that decision,
not just because he’s the Creator.
We’ve made the decision
to give ourselves to Jehovah God.
So, absolutely,
we’ve had the best life possible.
We have no regrets at all
about what we’ve done with our life,
giving Jehovah the first place.
Bill and Sandra,
it’s been a real privilege
to hear more about you, and I know
there are more stories to tell.
How can you boil down 60-plus years
of loyal service to Jehovah?
But you have given us
great insights.
Thank you for sharing
those gems with us.